# Late relapsed HCC multi-omics study
Late relapse of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) after surgery limits long-term survival and is commonly identified as a multicentric or de novo cancer. The transcriptome and epigenetic features of the tumor microenvironment in late-relapsed HCC remain poorly understood. We performed single-cell transcriptomic, T cell receptor, and chromatin accessibility sequencing on eleven primary and seven late-relapsed HCC patients. The immune constituents of tumor showed more similarity with corresponding normal tissue in late-relapsed HCC than that of primary HCC. Malignant cells in late-relapsed HCC exhibited significantly reduced tumor mutation burden and down-regulated expression of HLA-I, -II, and B2M, suggesting that tumor cells in late-relapsed HCC were selected by accumulating immune evasion features. Exhausted CD8+ T cells were less enriched in late-relapsed HCC than in primary ones and displayed irreversible chromatin accessibility modifications. Resident memory CD8+ T cells were significantly enriched in the adjacent normal tissue of late-relapsed HCC, indicating a consuming process in the tumor microenvironment. Although monocytes and macrophages had comparable abundance in primary and late-relapsed HCCs, they showed less M2 polarization in late-relapsed HCC. In addition, exhausted CD8+ T cells induced monocyte differentiation and macrophage polarization by releasing CSF1 and MIF, and this intercellular interaction exaggerated tumor progression. Our multi-omic single-cell sequencing provides broader and deeper insights into the immune evasion nature of late-relapsed HCC, potentially assisting treatment choice in this clinical scenario.
